The world is in chaos.
This system of things is disintegrating
—the world economy, health systems,
security, governments—
and we know where this all is leading.
It’s leading to the great tribulation.
Have you ever asked yourself,
‘Do I have enough faith
‘to face these fear-inspiring events
with “the joy of Jehovah”?’
Well, we can learn much
from the example of Habakkuk.
He lived in a similar time.
Jehovah inspired him to give
this prophecy about 20 years before
the destruction
of Jerusalem in 607 B.C.E.
Our daily text comments highlight
three lessons we can learn
from the book of Habakkuk.
It says there: “Never stop praying,
“. . . listen to what Jehovah tells us
through his Word and organization . . . ,
and patiently wait on Jehovah.”
So let us take those three points
and discuss them briefly.
The first one: “Never stop praying.”
Habakkuk, in chapters 1 and 2,
is engaged in a dialogue with Jehovah God.
And if you look here in chapter 1,
verses 1-4,
he’s asking Jehovah very intensely,
‘Why do you allow violence,
wrongdoing, oppression, injustice?’
It concerned him very much.
Then Jehovah answered Habakkuk
from verses 5-11,
and Jehovah says something
very interesting in verse 5.
He says:
“Something will happen in your days
“that you will not believe
even if it is told to you.
For here I am raising up the Chaldeans,”
the Babylonians.
So Jehovah was going to bring Babylon
to bring judgment and punishment
on the evildoers.
So Jehovah answered his prayer.
We also are affected by injustice,
are we not?
A brother here at Bethel recently told me
that he was watching a news program,
and the reporter was explaining
all the obvious and terrible
injustices that were happening.
He said: “It got me very tense.
I had to shut the television off.”
But then he said: “I talked to Jehovah.
Afterward,” he said,
“I calmed right down,
and my confidence returned.”
So prayer is very important.
It puts us in the right frame of mind,
but it doesn’t end there.
We need to go to the next step,
that of listening to what Jehovah tells us
through his Word and his organization.
Now, we can take the example
from Habakkuk here in chapter 2.
He helps us to see a procedure,
a process, or an approach that he took.
First, in Habakkuk 2:1,
he says: “At my guardpost
I will keep standing,
and I will station myself on the rampart.”
Then he says:
“I will keep watch to see
what he will speak by means of me
and what I will reply
when I am reproved.”
Do you see the two things he was doing?
He was keeping standing
and, the next thing, he was keeping watching.
So “keep standing.”
In this particular case, he says he
“will station [himself] on the rampart.”
Now, a rampart, in those days,
could often have been a wall around the city
—a huge, strong wall.
So in other words,
he was keeping himself
in a position of safety, first of all.
And then secondly, he “[watched] to see.”
He listened to what Jehovah was telling him.
Now, as you know,
listening has two components.
The one part is hearing,
getting the sense of it.
And the second part is acting upon it.
So here Jehovah was speaking to Habakkuk.
In verse 2, Jehovah answered him,
and Jehovah said: “Write down the vision,
“and inscribe it clearly on tablets,
so that the one reading aloud from it
might do so easily.”
Very interesting
that Jehovah gives him
an assignment
to write this down.
But Jehovah also reveals
that he had in mind for someone
to read it aloud,
to spread his message to others.
So we can follow that example of Habakkuk.
First of all, place ourselves
under Jehovah’s protection,
“on [our] rampart,” as it were,
under the mighty hand of God.
Don’t leave that safe place.
And then secondly, listen.
Be ready to respond
to whatever Jehovah tells us to do.
So how do we stay in our place?
Well, we stay focused on our assignment.
We have work to do.
We must preach and teach and do our part
in the Christian congregation.
And we listen by being
very carefully attuned to God’s organization,
the leading we receive
from God’s organization.
We cannot anticipate
what is going to happen next.
Take, for instance, with this pandemic,
who of us expected that?
But look how beautifully Jehovah’s people
—his organization—
led us through these very difficult times.
This now brings us to the third aspect,
patiently wait.
The reality is that matters are going
to get far worse than they are now.
And we shouldn’t be surprised
if our reaction is the same
as that of Habakkuk when he
started anticipating what was coming.
Let us read Habakkuk 3:16.
He says:
“I heard and I trembled within;
“at the sound my lips quivered . . .
My legs beneath me were shaking.”
But then he says
(the second part of verse 16):
“But I quietly wait for the day of distress.”
That reaction is not a lack of faith,
“but . . . quietly wait”
—that’s evidence of true faith.
Now, Habakkuk was not naive.
He knew what was coming.
He describes here in verse 17:
“The fig tree may not blossom, . . .
“no fruit on the vines;
the olive crop may fail, . . .
the fields may produce no food.”
So food may run short.
Property may be lost.
Standards of living may go down.
But the question is, How will we respond?
What will be our reaction?
Will we quietly wait
and patiently, calmly
accept whatever happens,
even if the sequence of events
are not exactly what we expect them to be?
So, what’s the lesson?
The lesson is at Habakkuk 2:3;
Jehovah has an appointed time.
He says the vision is
“for [the] appointed time, . . .
“Keep in expectation of it! . . .
It will not be late!”
So, what matters is not
when the end will come
or how the end will come
but that we live a life of faith
doing Jehovah’s will.
So back to the question,
Do I have enough faith
to go through
the upcoming fear-inspiring events
and keep my joy?
Absolutely!
At Habakkuk 3:18, he ends the chapter.
He says: “As for me,
“I will exult in Jehovah;
I will be joyful in the God of my salvation.”
So, what’s the bottom line?
Pray, listen, and wait patiently.